 ADJUDGED is a judgment decision by the umpire.
 An APPEAL is the act of a fielder in claiming violation of the rules
by the offensive team.
 A BALK is an illegal act by the pitcher with a runner or runners on 
base, entitling all runners to advance one base.
 A BALL is a pitch which does not enter the strike zone in flight 
and is not struck at by the batter. If the pitch touches the ground and 
bounces through the strike zone it is a “ball.”
 A BASE is one of four points which must be touched by a runner 
in order to score a run; more usually applied to the canvas bags and the 
rubber plate which mark the base points.
 A BASE COACH is a team member in uniform who is stationed in 
the coach’s box at first or third base to direct the batter and the runners.
 A BASE ON BALLS is an award of first base granted to a batter 
who, during his time at bat, receives four pitches outside the strike zone 
or following a signal from the defensive team’s manager to the umpire 
that he intends to intentionally walk the batter.  If the manager informs 
the umpire of this intention, the umpire shall award the batter first base 
as if the batter had received four pitches outside the strike zone.
 A BATTER is an offensive player who takes his position in the 
batter’s box.
 BATTER-RUNNER is a term that identifies the offensive player 
who has just finished his time at bat until he is put out or until the play 
on which he became a runner ends.
 The BATTER’S BOX is the area within which the batter shall 
stand during his time at bat.
The BATTERY is the pitcher and catcher.
 BENCH OR DUGOUT is the seating facilities reserved for  
players, substitutes and other team members in uniform when they are 
not actively engaged on the playing field.
 A BUNT is a batted ball not swung at, but intentionally met with 
the bat and tapped slowly within the infield.
 A CALLED GAME is one in which, for any reason, the umpire-in-
chief terminates play.
 A CATCH is the act of a fielder in getting secure possession in 
his hand or glove of a ball in flight and firmly holding it; providing he 
does not use his cap, protector, pocket or any other part of his uniform 
in getting possession. It is not a catch, however, if simultaneously or 
immediately following his contact with the ball, he collides with a player, 
or with a wall, or if he falls down, and as a result of such collision or 
falling, drops the ball. It is not a catch if a fielder touches a fly ball which 
then hits a member of the offensive team or an umpire and then is caught 
by another defensive player. In establishing the validity of the catch, 
the fielder shall hold the ball long enough to prove that he has complete 
control of the ball and that his release of the ball is voluntary and inten-
tional. If the fielder has made the catch and drops the ball while in the act 
of making a throw following the catch, the ball shall be adjudged to have 
been caught.
(Catch) Comment:  A catch is legal if the ball is finally held 
by any fielder, even though juggled, or held by another fielder 
before it touches the ground.  Runners may leave their bases 
the instant the first fielder touches the ball.  A fielder may reach 
over a fence, railing, rope or other line of demarcation to make 
a catch.  He may jump on top of a railing, or canvas that may 
be in foul ground.  No interference should be allowed when a 
fielder reaches over a fence, railing, rope or into a stand to catch 
a ball. He does so at his own risk.
If a fielder, attempting a catch at the edge of the dugout, is “held 
up” and kept from an apparent fall by a player or players of 
either team and the catch is made, it shall be allowed.
The CATCHER is the fielder who takes his position back of the 
home base.
 The CATCHER’S BOX is that area within which the catcher shall 
stand until the pitcher delivers the ball.
 THE CLUB is a person or group of persons responsible for         
assembling the team personnel, providing the playing field and required 
facilities, and representing the team in relations with the league.
 A COACH is a team member in uniform appointed by the manager 
to perform such duties as the manager may designate, such as but not 
limited to acting as base coach.
 A DEAD BALL is a ball out of play because of a legally created 
temporary suspension of play.
 The DEFENSE (or DEFENSIVE) is the team, or any player of the 
team, in the field.
 A DOUBLE-HEADER is two regularly scheduled or rescheduled 
games, played in immediate succession.
 A DOUBLE PLAY is a play by the defense in which two offensive 
players are put out as a result of continuous action, providing there is no 
error between putouts.
(a)   A force double play is one in which both putouts are force plays.
(b)   A reverse force double play is one in which the first out is a 
force play and the second out is made on a runner for whom 
the force is removed by reason of the first out. Examples of 
reverse force plays: runner on first, one out; batter grounds to 
first baseman, who steps on first base (one out) and throws to 
second baseman or shortstop for the second out (a tag play). 
Another example: bases loaded, none out; batter grounds to 
third baseman, who steps on third base (one out); then throws 
to catcher for the second out (tag play).
DUGOUT (See definition of BENCH)
 A FAIR BALL is a batted ball that settles on fair ground between 
home and first base, or between home and third base, or that is on 
or over fair territory when bounding to the outfield past first or third 
base, or that touches first, second or third base, or that first falls on fair        
territory on or beyond first base or third base, or that, while on or over 
fair territory touches the person of an umpire or player, or that, while 
over fair territory, passes out of the playing field in flight.
A fair fly shall be judged according to the relative position of the 
ball and the foul line, including the foul pole, and not as to whether the 
fielder is on fair or foul territory at the time he touches the ball.
(Fair Ball) Comment:  If a fly ball lands in the infield                  
between home and first base, or home and third base, and then 
Definitions of Terms
bounces to foul territory without touching a player or umpire 
and before passing first or third base, it is a foul ball; or if the 
ball settles on foul territory or is touched by a player on foul 
territory, it is a foul ball. If a fly ball lands on or beyond first 
or third base and then bounces to foul territory, it is a fair hit.
A batted ball not touched by a fielder, which hits the pitcher’s 
rubber and rebounds into foul territory, between home and first, 
or between home and third base is a foul ball.
Clubs, increasingly, are erecting tall foul poles at the fence line 
with a wire netting extending along the side of the pole on fair 
territory above the fence to enable the umpires more accurately 
to judge fair and foul balls.
 FAIR TERRITORY is that part of the playing field within, and 
including the first base and third base lines, from home base to the 
bottom of the playing field fence and perpendicularly upwards. All foul 
lines are in fair territory.
 A FIELDER is any defensive player.
 FIELDER’S CHOICE is the act of a fielder who handles a fair 
grounder and, instead of throwing to first base to put out the batter-
runner, throws to another base in an attempt to put out a preceding 
runner. The term is also used by scorers (a) to account for the advance 
of the batter-runner who takes one or more extra bases when the fielder 
who handles his safe hit attempts to put out a preceding runner; (b) to 
account for the advance of a runner (other than by stolen base or error) 
while a fielder is attempting to put out another runner; and (c) to account 
for the advance of a runner made solely because of the defensive team’s 
indifference (undefended steal).
 A FLY BALL is a batted ball that goes high in the air in flight.
 A FORCE PLAY is a play in which a runner legally loses his right 
to occupy a base by reason of the batter becoming a runner.
(Force Play) Comment:  Confusion regarding this play is 
removed by remembering that frequently the “force” situation is 
removed during the play. Example: Man on first, one out, ball hit 
sharply to first baseman who touches the bag and batter-runner is 
out. The force is removed at that moment and runner advancing 
to second must be tagged. If there had been a runner on third or 
second, and either of these runners scored before the tag-out at 
second, the run counts. Had the first baseman thrown to second 
and the ball then had been returned to first, the play at second 
was a force out, making two outs, and the return throw to first 
ahead of the runner would have made three outs. In that case, 
no run would score.
Example: Not a force out. One out. Runner on first and third. 
Batter flies out. Two out. Runner on third tags up and scores. 
Runner on first tries to retouch before throw from fielder reaches 
first baseman, but does not get back in time and is out. Three 
outs. If, in umpire’s judgment, the runner from third touched 
home before the ball was held at first base, the run counts.
 A FORFEITED GAME is a game declared ended by the umpire-
in-chief in favor of the offended team by the score of 9 to 0, for viola-
tion of the rules.
 A FOUL BALL is a batted ball that settles on foul territory 
between home and first base, or between home and third base, or that 
bounds past first or third base on or over foul territory, or that first falls 
on foul territory beyond first or third base, or that, while on or over 
foul territory, touches the person of an umpire or player, or any object 
foreign to the natural ground.
A foul fly shall be judged according to the relative position of the 
ball and the foul line, including the foul pole, and not as to whether the 
infielder is on foul or fair territory at the time he touches the ball.
(Foul Ball) Comment:  A batted ball not touched by a fielder, 
which hits the pitcher’s rubber and rebounds into foul territory, 
between home and first, or between home and third base is a 
foul ball.
If a fly ball lands in the infield between home and first base, or 
home and third base, and then bounces to foul territory without 
touching a player or umpire and before passing first or third 
base, it is a foul ball; or if the ball settles on foul territory or is 
touched by a player on foul territory, it is a foul ball. If a fly ball 
lands on or beyond first or third base and then bounces to foul 
territory, it is a fair hit.
 FOUL TERRITORY is that part of the playing field outside the 
first and third base lines extended to the fence and perpendicularly 
upwards.   
 A FOUL TIP is a batted ball that goes sharp and direct from the bat 
to the catcher and is legally caught. It is not a foul tip unless caught, and 
any foul tip that is caught is a strike, and the ball is in play. 
 A GROUND BALL is a batted ball that rolls or bounces close to 
the ground.
 The HOME TEAM is the team on whose grounds the game is 
played, or if the game is played on neutral grounds, the home team shall 
be designated by mutual agreement.
 ILLEGAL (or ILLEGALLY) is contrary to these rules.
 An ILLEGAL PITCH is (1) a pitch delivered to the batter when 
the pitcher does not have his pivot foot in contact with the pitcher’s 
plate; (2) a quick return pitch.  An illegal pitch when runners are on base 
is a balk.
 An INFIELDER is a fielder who occupies a position in the infield.
 An INFIELD FLY is a fair fly ball (not including a line drive nor 
an attempted bunt) which can be caught by an infielder with ordinary 
effort, when first and second, or first, second and third bases are 
occupied, before two are out.  The pitcher, catcher and any outfielder 
who stations himself in the infield on the play shall be considered 
infielders for the purpose of this rule.
When it seems apparent that a batted ball will be an Infield Fly, 
the umpire shall immediately declare “Infield Fly” for the benefit of the 
runners. If the ball is near the baselines, the umpire shall declare “Infield 
Fly, if Fair.” 
The ball is alive and runners may advance at the risk of the ball 
being caught, or retouch and advance after the ball is touched, the same as 
on any fly ball. If the hit becomes a foul ball, it is treated the same as any 
foul.
If a declared Infield Fly is allowed to fall untouched to the ground, 
and bounces foul before passing first or third base, it is a foul ball. If a 
declared Infield Fly falls untouched to the ground outside the baseline, 
and bounces fair before passing first or third base, it is an Infield Fly.
(Infield Fly) Comment:  On the infield fly rule the umpire is to 
rule whether the ball could ordinarily have been handled by an 
infielder-not by some arbitrary limitation such as the grass, or 
the base lines. The umpire must rule also that a ball is an infield 
fly, even if handled by an outfielder, if, in the umpire’s judgment, 
the ball could have been as easily handled by an infielder. The 
infield fly is in no sense to be considered an appeal play. The 
umpire’s judgment must govern, and the decision should be 
made immediately.
When an infield fly rule is called, runners may advance at their 
own risk.  If on an infield fly rule, the infielder intentionally 
drops a fair ball, the ball remains in play despite the provisions 
of Rule 5.09(a)(12).  The infield fly rule takes precedence.
If interference is called during an Infield Fly, the ball remains 
alive until it is determined whether the ball is fair or foul.  If 
fair, both the runner who interfered with the fielder and the 
batter are out.  If foul, even if caught, the runner is out and the 
batter returns to bat.
 IN FLIGHT describes a batted, thrown, or pitched ball which has 
not yet touched the ground or some object other than a fielder.
 IN JEOPARDY is a term indicating that the ball is in play and an 
offensive player may be put out.
 An INNING is that portion of a game within which the teams     
alternate on offense and defense and in which there are three putouts for 
each team. Each team’s time at bat is a half-inning.
 INTERFERENCE
(a)   Offensive interference is an act by the team at bat which 
interferes with, obstructs, impedes, hinders or confuses any 
fielder attempting to make a play. 
(b)   Defensive interference is an act by a fielder that hinders or 
prevents a batter from hitting a pitch.
(c)   Umpire’s interference occurs (1) when a plate umpire hinders, 
impedes or prevents a catcher’s throw attempting to prevent 
a stolen base or retire a runner on a pick-off play, or (2) when 
a fair ball touches an umpire on fair territory before passing a 
fielder.
(d)   Spectator interference occurs when a spectator (or an object 
thrown by the spectator) hinders a player’s attempt to make 
a play on a live ball, by going onto the playing field, or 
reaching out of the stands and over the playing field.
 THE LEAGUE is a group of Clubs whose teams play each other in 
a pre-arranged schedule under these rules for the league championship.
 LEGAL (or LEGALLY) is in accordance with these rules.
 A LIVE BALL is a ball which is in play.
 A LINE DRIVE is a batted ball that goes sharp and direct from the 
bat to a fielder without touching the ground.
 THE MANAGER is a person appointed by the Club to be respon-
sible for the team’s actions on the field, and to represent the team in 
communications with the umpire and the opposing team. A player may 
be appointed manager.
 MINOR LEAGUE shall refer to any league within the profession-
al development league system operated by Major League Baseball in 
which Minor League Clubs are assigned to compete. 
 MINOR LEAGUE CLUB shall refer to any professional baseball 
club that is party to a Player Development License Agreement (“PDL”). 
 OBSTRUCTION is the act of a fielder who, while not in 
possession of the ball and not in the act of fielding the ball, impedes the 
progress of any runner.
 OFFENSE is the team, or any player of the team, at bat.
 OFFICIAL SCORER. See Rule 9.00.
 ORDINARY EFFORT is the effort that a fielder of average skill 
at a position in that league or classification of leagues should exhibit 
on a play, with due consideration given to the condition of the field and 
weather conditions.
(Ordinary Effort) Comment: This standard, called for 
several times in the Official Scoring Rules (e.g., Rules  
9.05(a)(3), 9.05(a)(4), 9.05(a)(6), 9.05(b)(3) (Base Hits); 
9.08(b) (Sacrifices); 9.12(a)(1) Comment, 9.12(d)(2) (Errors); 
and 9.13(a), 9.13(b) (Wild Pitches and Passed Balls)) and in 
the Official Baseball Rules (e.g., Definitions of Terms, Infield 
Fly), is an objective standard in regard to any particular fielder.  
In other words, even if a fielder makes his best effort, if that 
effort falls short of what an average fielder at that position in 
that league would have made in a situation, the Official Scorer 
should charge that fielder with an error.
 An OUT is one of the three required retirements of an offensive 
team during its time at bat.
 An OUTFIELDER is a fielder who occupies a position in the out-
field, which is the area of the playing field most distant from home base.
 OVERSLIDE (or OVERSLIDING) is the act of an offensive   
player when his slide to a base, other than when advancing from home 
to first base, is with such momentum that he loses contact with the base.
 A PENALTY is the application of these rules following an illegal 
act.
 The PERSON of a player or an umpire is any part of his body, his 
clothing or his equipment.
 A PITCH is a ball delivered to the batter by the pitcher.
(Pitch) Comment: All other deliveries of the ball by one player 
to another are thrown balls.
 A PITCHER is the fielder designated to deliver the pitch to the 
batter.
 The pitcher’s PIVOT FOOT is that foot which is in contact with 
the pitcher’s plate as he delivers the pitch.
“PLAY” is the umpire’s order to start the game or to resume action 
following any dead ball.
 A QUICK RETURN pitch is one made with obvious intent to 
catch a batter off balance.  It is an illegal pitch.
 REGULATION GAME See Rule 7.01.
 A RETOUCH is the act of a runner in returning to a base as legally 
required.
 A RUN (or SCORE) is the score made by an offensive player who 
advances from batter to runner and touches first, second, third and home 
bases in that order.
 A RUN-DOWN is the act of the defense in an attempt to put out a 
runner between bases.
 A RUNNER is an offensive player who is advancing toward, or 
touching, or returning to any base.
 “SAFE” is a declaration by the umpire that a runner is entitled to 
the base for which he was trying.
 SET POSITION is one of the two legal pitching positions.
 SQUEEZE PLAY is a term to designate a play when a team, with a 
runner on third base, attempts to score that runner by means of a bunt.
 A STRIKE is a legal pitch when so called by the umpire, which:
(a)  Is struck at by the batter and is missed;
(b)  Is not struck at, if any part of the ball passes through any part of 
the strike zone;
(c)	 Is fouled by the batter when he has less than two strikes;
(d) Is bunted foul;
(e)	Touches the batter as he strikes at it;
(f ) Touches the batter in flight in the strike zone; or
(g) Becomes a foul tip.
 The STRIKE ZONE is that area over home plate the upper limit 
of which is a horizontal line at the midpoint between the top of the 
shoulders and the top of the uniform pants, and the lower level is a line 
at the hollow beneath the kneecap. The Strike Zone shall be determined 
from the batter’s stance as the batter is prepared to swing at a pitched 
ball.  (For diagram of STRIKE ZONE, see Appendix 5.)
 A SUSPENDED GAME is a called game which is to be completed 
at a later date.
 A TAG is the action of a fielder in touching a base with his body 
while holding the ball securely and firmly in his hand or glove; or touch-
ing a runner with the ball, or with his hand or glove holding the ball 
(not including hanging laces alone), while holding the ball securely and 
firmly in his hand or glove. It is not a tag, however, if simultaneously 
or immediately following his touching a base or touching a runner, the 
fielder drops the ball. In establishing the validity of the tag, the fielder 
shall hold the ball long enough to prove that he has complete control of 
the ball.  If the fielder has made a tag and drops the ball while in the act 
of making a throw following the tag, the tag shall be adjudged to have 
been made.  For purposes of this definition any jewelry being worn by 
a player (e.g., necklaces, bracelets, etc.) shall not constitute a part of the 
player’s body.
 A THROW is the act of propelling the ball with the hand and arm 
to a given objective and is to be distinguished, always, from the pitch.
 A TIE GAME is a regulation game which is called when each 
team has the same number of runs.
 “TIME” is the announcement by an umpire of a legal interruption 
of play, during which the ball is dead.
 TOUCH.  To touch a player or umpire is to touch any part of his 
body, or any uniform or equipment worn by him (but not any jewelry 
(e.g., necklaces, bracelets, etc.) worn by a player).
(Touch) Comment:  Equipment shall be considered worn by a 
player or umpire if it is in contact with its intended place on his 
person.
 A TRIPLE PLAY is a play by the defense in which three offensive 
players are put out as a result of continuous action, providing there is no 
error between putouts.
 WILD PITCH is one so high, so low, or so wide of the plate that it 
cannot be handled with ordinary effort by the catcher.
 WIND-UP POSITION is one of the two legal pitching positions.
 NOTE:  Any reference in these Official Baseball Rules to 
“he,” “him” or “his” shall be deemed to be a reference to
“she,” “her” or “hers,” as the case may be,  
when the person is a female.